[Music]
so
hello welcome to topcast episode 32 part
two of the chapter on choices and in the
last episode
david was describing how certain
mathematicians and
other people were disappointed by the
way in which certain supposedly rational
systems
would sometimes throw up paradoxes
problems and things they didn't want
the system to have in other words they
bemoaned the fact
that logic could cause problems they
wished that
logic wasn't so that logic didn't cause
these issues that they thought were
inherently problematic inside of these
certain democratic systems
so let's just dive straight into what
david has to say about that
he writes we need something better to
wish for
something that is not incompatible with
logic reasonable progress
we've already encountered it it is the
basic condition for a political
system to be capable of making sustained
progress
popper's criterion that the system
facilitate the removal
of bad policies and bad governments
without violence
that entails abandoning who should rule
as a criterion for judging political
systems
the entire controversy about
apportionment rules and all other issues
in social choice theory has
traditionally been framed by all
concerned in terms of
who should rule what is the right number
of seats for each state or for each
political party
what does the group presumed entitled to
rule over its subgroups and individuals
want and what institutions will get it
what it wants
end quote okay pause there my reflection
now i'm going to go to what popper
himself
wrote about this in just a moment and
it's really a timeless point to make
actually
even if it's particularly relevant right
now as i'm speaking in
2020 i don't mention much at all
typically in
any of these podcasts or videos that i
do anything about current events i i
attempt to try and avoid current events
because i because i'd like this series
to stand for itself over time
and not be talking about parochial
issues that won't be relevant
in a few years to come so hopefully no
matter when you're listening to this
maybe someone's listening to this right
now in 2025 2030
things will still make sense to you
nothing will be out of context so to
speak
now all of that said i'm going to allow
myself one gratuitous mention of current
events
and that is about the fact that there is
a vast number of people as they always
would be
after any election a vast number of
people in the united states and
elsewhere who regret who the president
is right now president trump
and they've been calling not just for a
change of president
but a change in the system ever since he
was elected
at first they were calling for the
electoral college the way in which the
president is elected to be utterly
upended changed
thrown out and replaced with something
else but just
yesterday interestingly enough a
suggestion was put forward that a
bipartisan committee that seems fair
doesn't it bipartisan a bipartisan
committee
be established that will be able to vet
and veto
candidates for the presidency before
they ever stood
for election in other words an unelected
panel deciding
who would be a fit and proper person to
stand for
the presidency so this is to say that
there's something deficient with the
process
that exists right now according to these
people that
i think if you've committed certain
crimes you can't stand
for elected office including for the
presidency
uh the fact that the media is supposed
to have some responsibility in trying to
find out about the background of these
people that run for high office
whatever the case some people are very
unhappy with president trump and so they
want to
change the system so that a president
trump-style person
can never again be elected now in in
many ways none of this debate
is particularly new ever since democracy
was invented people have
lost elections and so blamed the system
rather than their own candidates or
policies it's the system
or the stupidity of the voter that is
the error not
their policies now they may be right
there may be a flaw in the system
perhaps the voters who are voting are
voting in ignorance of what actually the
policies happen to be
so they might be right in some ways but
as a criticism it's a poor one
because it can always be thrust forth
whenever anyone
loses an election it's rather like a
football team losing a match and then
blaming not merely the referee but the
rules themselves
it was the rules that was against them
if only there was a buy
team committee who could decide who was
a fit and proper person to play for
either side
then we could have fair football games
and it should be telling if the losing
football team consistently complains
that the rules themselves the rules of
football themselves are unfair
now this doesn't really happen that
often of course the analogy fails in
certain ways
however if your first response upon
losing an election or being on the side
of the person who lost is to blame the
system
then that should be revealing and it
should give you pause about
what's motivating you apart from just
the fact that you lost
now i'll put it up on the screen but on
on twitter david deutsch commented
in 2018 that hyperbole is basically a
sign of our times he wrote in response
to someone who said we live in an age of
darkness and a lot of people are talking
about this that
the trump how in some way is ushering in
a new age of darkness
uh david uh disagreed with um just the
general the general we weren't talking
he wasn't talking about trump in any way
i don't think um but he did say quote we
are not living in an age of darkness
but in an age of hyperbole end quote
and perhaps the most hyperbolic thing
one can say of their political opponent
certainly these days is that they are
nazis
godwin's law is the notion that this
happens inevitably in fact in online
discussions
of course godwin's law is no law
actually it's just a funny reproach
of how to behave online but the trump is
hitler trope
it's no joke to some people it seems
some really do need to understand the
history of hitler and how
he is categorically different in many
ways to donald trump
some really do need to understand that
there is
no actual parallel here between trump
and hitler it's
it's a ridiculous criticism to make but
it's being made
more and more fervently for some strange
reason
initially hitler had checks on his power
under german law but he violated them
over and again
with violence for example in the night
of the long knives and soon after that
in 1934
germany's president hindenburg died and
hitler simply declared himself
head of both the state and the
government and thus an absolute tyrant
in germany
trump does not as hitler did at the time
have a private
army he has not assassinated his
political rivals and he has not
dissolved
or absorbed the powers of either the
congress the senate or the supreme court
this hyperbole nonetheless continues
each side
caricatures the other to some extent by
exaggerating
now president trump himself of course is
a figure that does not always help to
clarify things
speaking of hyperbole he speaks in the
most hyperbolic terms that we
generally ever hear a politician using
it's almost a trademark of his
everything is the biggest or the best or
the greatest
now of course in some cases in the case
of the us in particular
it's quite right to talk about them
being the biggest and the best and the
greatest but when president trump
claims elections that have not yet been
held
might be rigged it has an air of
hyperbole to it it tends to undermine
institutions and it's just as bad as sin
as claiming
we need to change the whole system when
our candidate loses
trump hasn't even lost yet but he's
setting things up so that
if he loses he can say well the system
was the thing that was flawed so again
systems might be flawed but the solution
is not to suggest the entire system is
altogether bad
but rather it's to identify the precise
error
that you think is there in the system
and to propose a policy to correct it
that's how improvements work in the case
of democracy
how can it be improved how can we come
to identify errors in a democratic
system and correct them
well let's take a deeper dive into that
very question through what popper had to
say on the matter
so i'll read part of his article his
article can be found here in the
economist
and you should read the whole thing
yourself it was first published in 1988
and then it was published again
just before the last presidential
election in the united states in 2016.
now as the economist says here and
i'll just read what the introduction to
the article says
quote the first book in english by
professor
sir kyle popper was accepted for
publication in london
while hitler's bombs were falling and
was published in 1945
under the title the open society and its
enemies
the book was well received but in this
article
sir carl questions whether his central
theory of democracy
which he does not characterize as the
rule of the people
has been understood end quote so what
pop is going to
do here is to is to reimagine
re-explain what democracy actually means
now it doesn't matter that prior to papa
people thought that democracy was about
solving the who should
rule question and about the rule of the
many and all this kind of stuff
that doesn't matter in the same way that
when people tried to understand what
science was
and thought it was about empiricism it
was about observing and deriving from
those observations
the laws of nature despite the fact that
that's what people thought science was
and what some people still think science
is today or that
what science amounts to is repeatedly
observing things and extracting from
those the laws of nature by
extrapolation it doesn't matter that
that's what people think
distinguishes science from non-science
if some people think the difference
between science and non-science
is that in science you use a method of
induction
and you repeatedly observe things find
trends and then extrapolate natural laws
from those observations
it doesn't matter that they think that
that's what distinguishes science from
everything else they're wrong
science is distinguished from other
things by
the criterion of demarcation that papa
figured out which is
falsification testability being able to
experimentally test your hypotheses
this is what separates science from
non-science and as david deutsch
refined further although testable
theories are a dime a dozen
what we're really looking for is hard to
vary explanations of the physical world
and part of the hard to very features of
theories about physical reality is their
experimental testability
and so this is what science is okay so
what that's got to do with this is just
because
many people think that democracy is
about the rule of many people
pop is about to explain that's not
really what it's about that's not the
essential characteristic of democracy
nor why we should hope to have democracy
rather than alternatives like
tyrannies okay so let me read
from the article i won't be reading at
all and just as with the beginning of
infinity i'll uh i'll let you know when
i'm
cutting bits out so you might want to go
to the article itself i'll put the link
in the description
and up there on the screen there's also
what you're looking for that's the
article you're looking for papa rights
my theory of democracy is very simple
and easy for everybody to understand
but its fundamental problem is so
different from the age-old theory of
democracy which everybody takes for
granted
that it seems that this difference has
not been grasped just because
of the simplicity of the theory it
avoids high-sounding abstract words like
rule freedom and reason i do believe in
freedom and reason
but i do not think that one can
construct a simple practical and
fruitful theory
in these terms they are too abstract and
too prone to be misused and of course
nothing whatever can be gained by their
definition pause there my reflection on
this
that's cinequanon an essential component
if we excuse the irony of saying that
of papa's approach to philosophy getting
caught up in definitions is a losing
game and it is the game
played by so many other philosophers the
linguistic philosophers
which is to say most philosophers today
and see
the last chapter of the beginning of
infinity for more about that
moving on and papa writes quote this
article is divided into three main parts
the first sets out briefly what may be
called the classical theory of democracy
the theory of the rule of the people the
second is a brief sketch of my more
realistic theory
the third is in the main and outline of
some practical applications of my theory
in reply to the question what practical
difference does this new theory make
okay and then papa goes into the first
part
the classical theory the classical
theory is in brief
the theory that democracy is the rule of
the people and that the people have a
right to rule
for the claim that the people have this
right many in various reasons have been
given
however it will not be necessary for me
to enter into these reasons here
instead i will briefly examine some of
the historical background of the theory
and some of the terminology plato was
the first theoretician to make a system
out of the distinctions between what he
regarded
as the main forms of the city-state
according to the number of rulers he
distinguished between
number one a monarchy the rule of one
good man
and tyranny the distorted form of
monarchy
two the aristocracy the rule of a few
good men
and oligarchy its distorted form and
three
democracy the rule of the many of all
the people
democracy did not have two forms for the
many always formed a rabble and so
democracy was distorted in itself
paul's there just me reflecting on that
um so plato didn't like democracy
he argued in the republic which some of
us had to suffer through at university
he argued for philosopher kings educated
people who would justly and
rightly rule over the masses who
couldn't be trusted with power
okay let's keep going papa writes quote
if one looks more closely at this
classification and if one asks oneself
what problem was at the back of plato's
mind
then one finds that the following
underlay not only plato's classification
and theory
but also those of everybody else from
plato to karl marx and beyond
the fundamental problem has always been
who should rule the state
one of my main points will be that this
problem must be replaced by a totally
different one
plato's answer was simple and naive the
best should rule
if possible the best of all alone next
choice
the best few the aristocrats but
certainly not the many
the rabble the demos the athenian
practice had been even before plato's
birth precisely the opposite
the people the demos should rule all
important political decisions such as
war and peace were made by
the assembly of all full citizens this
is now called
direct democracy but we must never
forget the citizens formed a minority of
the inhabitants even of the natives
from the point of view here adopted the
important thing is that
in practice the athenian democrats
regarded their democracy as the
alternative to tyranny
to arbitrary rule in fact they knew well
that a popular leader
might be invested with tyrannical powers
by a popular vote so they knew
that a popular vote may be wrong-headed
even in the most important matters
the institution of ostracism recognized
this the ostracized person was banned as
a matter of precaution only
he was neither tried nor regarded as
guilty the athenians were right
decisions arrived that democratically
and even the powers conveyed upon the
government by democratic vote
may be wrong it is hard if not
impossible to construct a constitution
that safeguards against mistakes this is
one of the strongest reasons for
founding the idea of democracy
upon the principle of avoiding tyranny
rather than upon a divine or morally
legitimate
right of the people to rule pulls down
my reflection so that's really important
this is why the american constitution
the british tradition has held up as
being a form of excellence in governing
because it attempts to avoid tyrants
it's not perfect but it's a way of
trying to ensure that no
one single person has so much power as
to be able to become a tyrant over
everyone else
this therefore is the idea of checks and
balances
so democracy regarded as the rule of the
many can
make mistakes but as we will come to see
democracy in the papillion sense is a
system for correcting
errors if we consider democracy wrongly
as the who should rule question
then if it has primacy what we have and
what plato correctly identified as a
problem
is mob rule for example people could
democratically vote away their rights
or democratically vote to take away
everyone's money or other wealth
and on that view some of us argue that
freedom or free markets or capitalism
liberty whatever you want to call it
is morally prior to that kind of
democracy
and that means we need certain things we
should call them rights that cannot be
voted away by any government they are
prior to the government
and to protect such things a
constitution is required and courts are
needed to arbitrate
the rule of the many may be the best
system except for all those others that
have been tried from time to time
but it cannot be an absolute ruler for
then
it would be a kind of tyranny with no
protections for minorities
okay now i'm skipping a bit and papa
goes through
all the ways in which the who should
rule question
has repeatedly come up over the years
in the british tradition and he writes
after me skipping a couple of paragraphs
karl marx who is not a british
politician was still dominated by the
old platonic problem
which he saw as who should rule the good
or the bad
the workers or the capitalists and even
those who rejected the state altogether
in the name of freedom could not free
themselves from the fetters
of a misconceived old problem for they
called themselves anarchists
that is opponents of all forms of rule
one can sympathise with their
unsuccessful attempt to get away from
the old problem
who should rule on to part two which
papa calls a more realistic theory
quote in the open society and its
enemies i suggested
that an entirely new problem should be
recognized as the fundamental problem of
a rational political theory
the new problem as distinct from the old
who should rule can be formulated
as follows how was the state to be
constituted
so that bad rulers can be got rid of
without bloodshed
without violence okay just pause there
and
repeating that the new problem
with respect to democracy as distinct
from the old
who should rule question can be
formulated as follows
how is the state to be constituted
so that bad rulers can be got rid of
without bloodshed
without violence this in contrast to the
old question
is a thoroughly practical almost
technical problem and the modern
so-called democracies are all good
examples
of practical solutions to this problem
even though they were not consciously
designed
with this problem in mind for they all
adopt what is the simplest solution to
the new problem
that is the principle that the
government can be dismissed by a
majority vote
in theory however these modern
democracies are still based on the old
problem
and on the completely impractical
ideology that it is the people
the whole adult population who are or
should by right
be the real and ultimate and only
legitimate rulers
but of course nowhere do the people
actually rule
it is the governments that rule and
unfortunately also bureaucrats our civil
servants or our uncivil masters as
winston churchill called them
whom it is difficult if not impossible
to make accountable for their actions
pause their my reflection yes
controversially i think sometimes i
make noises like this myself that the
bureaucrats and again i'm allowing
myself in this episode to be
a little bit parochial a little bit
contemporary and remind people that in
we had a coronavirus where bureaucrats
became far more powerful
seemingly than they had been certainly
in my lifetime anyway
um the chief health officers and their
deputies
were the people who were getting up in
front of the
demos each and every day and
and informing us of new restrictions
almost by fiat and the politicians were
at least in the place that i occupy in
new south wales and
in victoria in australia um there
seemed to be very little resistance and
this this concerned me it concerns me
because
as papa says there it is difficult if
not impossible to make them accountable
for their actions they aren't
accountable so if they make a mistake
well apparently it goes to the
politician who is responsible the
politician could always turn around and
say well i was just following the expert
advice
of the chief bureaucrat of the chief
scientist of the chief health officer
so it's not my fault what would you want
me to do not take the advice of the
expert
but the expert can always say well i was
just giving the best advice i had at the
time it's ultimately the politician's
decision as to whether or not they enact
this policy or not
so here we have a violation of what i
would regard as a violation of popus
criterion
no one's accountable and this is a
problem okay
rather than me going on a tirade let me
continue to read
uh papa's article quote what are the
consequences of this simple and
practical theory of government
my way of putting the problem and my
simple solution do not of course clash
with the practice of western democracies
such as the unwritten constitution of
britain and the many written
constitutions
which took the british parliament more
or less as their model it is this
practice
and not their theory which my theory my
problem and its solution
tries to describe and for this reason i
think that i may call it a theory of
democracy
even though it is emphatically not a
theory of the rule of the people
but rather the rule of law that
postulates the bloodless dismissal of
the government by a majority vote
my theory easily avoids the paradoxes
and difficulties of the whole theory
for instance such problems as what has
to be done if ever the people vote to
establish a dictatorship
of course this is not likely to happen
if the vote is free but it has happened
and what if it does happen most
constitutions in fact require far more
than a majority vote to amend or change
constitutional provisions
and thus would demand perhaps a
two-thirds or even a three-quarters
qualified majority for a vote against
democracy
but this demand shows that they provide
for such a change and at the same time
they do not conform to the principle
that the unqualified majority will is
the ultimate source of power
that the people through a majority vote
are entitled to rule
all these theoretical difficulties are
avoided if one abandons the question who
should rule
and replaces it by the new and practical
problem how can we best avoid situations
in which a bad ruler causes too much
harm when we say that the best solution
known to us
is a constitution that allows a majority
vote to dismiss the government
then we do not say that the majority
vote will always be right we do not even
say that it will usually be right
we say only that this very imperfect
procedure is the best so far invented
winston churchill once said jokingly
that democracy is the worst form of
government with the exception of all
other known forms of government
and this is the point anybody who has
ever lived under another form of
government that is under a dictatorship
which cannot be removed without
bloodshed
will know that a democracy imperfect
though it is is worth fighting for
and i believe worth dying for this
however is only my personal conviction
i should regard it as wrong to try and
persuade others of it we could base our
whole theory on this
that there are only two alternatives
known to us either a dictatorship
or some form of democracy and we did not
base our choice on the goodness of
democracy which may be doubtful
but solely on the evilness of a
dictatorship which is certain
not only because the dictator is bound
to make use of his power
but because a dictator even if he were
benevolent would rob all others of their
responsibility
and thus of their human rights and
duties this is a sufficient basis for
deciding in favor of democracy
that is a rule of law that enables us to
get rid of the government
no majority however large ought to be
qualified to abandon this rule of law
okay and pause there um popper then goes
into
a lengthy discussion of proportional
representation
uh which is what david talks about in
the beginning infinity so i don't want
to repeat
that here now and and so instead of
reading that part i'm going to skip all
the way to where papa talks about
talks about the two-party system he's
just criticized the idea of
minority government in other words
governments that are made up of
coalitions
and we've talked how about the problem
of coalitions and compromises before
so it's better to have a majority
government who can be held accountable
for the policies that they enact and so
when they fail they can be held
responsible for that and they can take
accountability for it as well
so this is why majority government is
better than coalitions where
people can all say i'm not responsible
for this bad policy because it's a
compromise and i had to agree with these
people over here that i don't
particularly like but in order to form
government we had to compromise but the
compromise wasn't my idea
i wanted to do this other different
policy over there okay so
having established a majority rule is
better let's read what papa has to say
about the two-party system and he writes
quote in order to make a majority
government probable
we need something approaching a
two-party system as in britain in the
united states
since the existence of the practice of
proportional representation makes such a
possibility hard to attain
i suggest that in the interests of
parliamentary responsibility
we should resist the perhaps tempting
idea that democracy demands proportional
representation
instead we should strive for a two-party
system or at least for an approximation
to it
for such a system encourages a continual
process of self-criticism by the two
parties
such a view will however provoke
frequently voiced objections to the
two-party system that merit examination
a two-party system suppresses the
formation of other parties
this is correct but considerable changes
are apparent within the two major
parties in britain as well as the united
states
so the repression need not be a denial
of flexibility
the point is that in a two-party system
the defeated party is
liable to take an electoral defeat
seriously
so it may look for an internal reform of
its aims which is an ideological reform
if the party is defeated twice in
succession or even three times
the search for new ideas may become
frantic which obviously is a healthy
development
this is likely to happen even if the
loss of votes was not very great
under a system with many parties and
with coalitions this is not likely to
happen especially when the loss of votes
is small
both the party bosses and the electorate
are inclined to change quietly
they regard it as part of the game since
none of the parties had clear
responsibilities
pause down my reflection yes so again we
get into this idea of compromise
if you are not clearly responsible you
as the leader or you as the party for a
particular policy that fails
then you can always revert back to
saying well let's
actually try my policy even if you don't
have power to get your policy in
and so it just becomes this vicious
cycle of
compromise and refusing to take
responsibility coming up with another
compromise refusing to take
responsibility and so on
and so i'll just finish with the final
paragraph
that popper wrote in this article quote
it is also said a two-party system is
incompatible with the idea of an open
society
with the openness for new ideas and with
the idea of pluralism
reply both britain and the united states
are very open to new ideas
complete openness would of course be
self-defeating as would be complete
freedom
also cultural openness and political
openness are two different things
and more important even than opening
wider and wider the political debate
may be a proper attitude towards the
political day of judgment
end quote okay so now let's segue
from papa straight to david deutsch in
the beginning of infinity
and david writes so let us reconsider
collective decision making in terms of
popper's criterion instead
instead of wondering earnestly which of
the self-evident yet mutually
inconsistent criteria of fairness
representativeness and so on are the
most self-evident so that they can be
entrenched
we judge such criteria along with all
other actual or proposed political
institutions
according to how well they promote the
removal
of bad rules and bad policies to do this
they must embody traditions of peaceful
critical discussion of rulers policies
and the political institutions
themselves
in this view any interpretation of the
democratic process is merely a way of
consulting the people
to find out who should rule or what
policies to implement misses the point
of what is happening
an election does not play the same role
in a rational society as consulting an
oracle or a priest
or obeying orders from the king did in
earlier societies
the essence of democratic
decision-making is not the choice made
by the system at elections
but the ideas created between elections
and elections are merely one of the many
institutions whose function is to allow
such ideas to be created
tested modified and rejected the voters
are not a fount of wisdom from which the
right policies can be empirically
derived
they're attempting fallibly to explain
the world and thereby
improve it they are both individually
and collectively
seeking the truth or should be if they
are rational and there is an objective
truth of the matter
problems are soluble society is not a
zero-sum game
the civilization of the enlightenment
did not get where it is today by
cleverly sharing out the wealth
votes or anything else that was in
dispute when it began it got here by
creating ex
nilio in particular what voters are
doing in elections is not synthesizing a
decision of a super being society
they are choosing which experiments are
to be attempted next
and principally which are to be
abandoned because there is no longer a
good explanation for why they are best
the politicians and their policies are
those experiments
when one uses no go theorem such as
arrows to model real decision making one
has to assume quite unrealistically
that none of the decision makers in the
group is able to persuade the others to
modify their preferences or to create
new preferences that are easier to agree
on
the realistic case is that neither the
preferences nor the options need be the
same at the end of the decision making
process
as they were at the beginning pause down
my reflection
yes and so this in a nutshell is
it's why the traditional way of thinking
about decision making as selecting among
existing options is completely false
people being created as they go through
the decision-making process
are going to improve the theories they
have on offer the choices they have
before them
they're going to freely create new
knowledge freely choose
freely bring into their will new content
new ideas
they're the ones that do it they are the
causal agents they are the thing in the
universe which if you had to explain
how was that choice arrived at it was
the fact that that person or that
committee or that group of people
decided upon that choice they chose that
it wasn't an outworking of the laws of
physics although the laws of physics
were still being obeyed by everything in
that system the real
causal explanation comes down to a
creative agent namely a person
or a group of people okay i'm skipping a
number of paragraphs here and i'm going
straight to the section on
proportional representation because this
is something we avoided in the
proper article and david writes about
this
quote proportional representation is
often defended on the grounds that it
leads to coalition governments
and compromised policies but compromises
amalgams of the policies of the
contributors
have an undeservedly high reputation
though they are certainly better than
immediate violence they are generally as
i have explained bad policies
if a policy is no one's idea of what
will work then why should it work
but that is not the worst of it the key
defect of compromised policies
is that when one of them is implemented
and fails
no one learns anything because no one
ever agreed with it
thus compromise policies shield the
underlying explanations which
do at least seem good to some faction
from being criticized and abandoned
the system used to elect members of the
legislatures of most countries in the
british
political tradition is that each
district or constituency in the country
is entitled to one seat in the
legislature and that seat goes to the
candidate with the largest number of
votes in that district
this is called the plurality voting
system
plurality meaning largest number of
votes often called the
first past post system because there is
no prize for any runner-up and no second
round of voting
both of which feature in other electoral
systems for the sake of increasing the
proportionality
of outcomes plurality voting typically
over represents the two largest parties
compared with the poor proportion of
votes they receive
moreover it is not guaranteed to avoid
the population paradox
and is even capable of bringing one
party to power when another has received
far more votes in total paul said my
reflection precisely what happened with
the
2016 election and people were so upset
with the electoral college
because although the loser hillary
clinton got the largest number of votes
overall
the system the the electoral college
system
actually enabled donald trump to take
power
back to the book these features are
often cited as arguments against
plurality voting and in favor of a more
proportional system
either literal proportional
representation or other schemes such as
transferable vote systems and runoff
systems
which have the effect of making the
representation of voters in the
legislature
more proportional however under popper's
criterion that is all insignificant in
comparison with the greater
effectiveness
of plurality voting at removing bad
governments and policies
let me trace the mechanism of that
advantage more explicitly
following a plurality voting election
the usual outcome
is that the party with the largest total
number of votes has an overall majority
in the legislature
and therefore takes sole charge all the
losing parties are removed entirely from
power
this is rare under proportional
representation because some of the
parties in the old coalition
are usually needed in the new one
consequently the logic of plurality
is that politicians and political
parties have little chance of gaining
any sharing power
unless they can persuade a substantial
proportion of the population to vote for
them
that gives all parties the incentive to
find better explanations
or at least to convince more people of
their existing ones for if they fail
they will be relegated to powerlessness
if at the next election
poor semi-reflection so that's what it's
all about if we have coalitions if we
have
10 parties that have to come together
and share power in order to form
government
then at the next election not all of
them will be voted out
only some and we could expect that some
of them will retain power and therefore
do not need to change their policies
so even though a vast number of people
might want to remove
those politicians from power in fact a
majority might want to remove them from
power
they won't be removed from power they'll
remain there the if the party with the
greatest number of votes still only has
10 percent of the votes because there
are 20 plus parties and all the other
parties have five percent
or less of the vote this is a real
problem it means that
even if 90 of people haven't voted for
the party that gets the most number of
votes and only 10 of the votes
we can't get rid of that party from
power because it will just continue to
have this minority of people who
continue to vote
for it this is why the two-party system
is better this is why
coalitions are bad why compromises are
bad why
the ability to remove bad policies bad
politicians politicians you don't want
is the criterion of a democratic system
if you can't get rid of that bad
government or that those
bad people in power because they've only
got 10 percent of the vote
this is a violation of popus criterion
it needs to be easy
to remove these people if the majority
disagree with them but these
these systems that are not a plurality
voting system that are proportional
voting systems
are a violation it's not to say the
plurality system is perfect
or even good as popper would say it's
just that it's
better than any of the other systems
that are out there all the other systems
that are out there
there are knock down criticisms of them
and that's why we should defend
two-party systems first pass to
post-voting okay skipping a little bit
and david writes
under a proportional system small
changes in public opinion
seldom account for anything and power
can easily shift in the opposite
direction to public opinion
what counts most is the changes in the
opinion of the leader of the
third largest party this shields not
only that leader
but most of the incumbent politicians
and policies from being removed from
power through voting
they are more often removed by losing
support within their own party or by
shifting alliances between parties
so in that respect the system badly
fails popper's criterion
under plurality voting it is the other
way around the all or nothing nature of
the constituency elections
and the consequent low representation of
small parties makes the overall outcome
sensitive to small changes in opinion
when there is a small shift in opinion
away from the ruling party it is usually
in real danger of losing power
completely
under proportional representation there
are strong incentives for the system's
characteristic unfairness to persist or
to become worse over time
for example if a small faction defects
from a large party
it may then end up with more chance of
having its policies tried out than it
would if its supporters had remained
within the original party this results
in a proliferation of small parties in
the legislature
which in turn increases the necessity
for coalitions including coalitions with
the smaller parties
which further increases the
disproportion of power in israel the
country with the world's most
proportional electoral system
this effect has been so severe that at
the time of writing even the two largest
parties combined
cannot muster an overall majority and
yet under that system which has
sacrificed all
other considerations in favor of the
supposed fairness of proportionality
even proportionality itself is not
always achieved
in the election of 1992 the right-wing
parties as a whole
received the majority of the popular
vote but the left-wing ones had a
majority of the seats
this was because a greater proportion of
the fringe parties that failed to reach
the threshold for receiving even one
seat were right wing in contrast the
error correction attributes of the
plurality voting system have a tendency
to avoid the paradoxes
to which the system is theoretically
prone and quickly to undo them when they
do happen
because all those incentives are the
other way around for instance in the
canadian province of manitoba in 1926
the conservative party received more
than twice as many votes as any other
party
but won none of the 17 seats allocated
to that province as a result
it lost power in the national parliament
despite having received the most votes
nationally too
and yet even in that rare extreme case
the disproportionateness
between the two main parties
representations in parliament was not
that great
the average liberal voter received 1.31
times as many members of parliament as
the average conservative one and what
happened next
in the following election the
conservative party again had the largest
number of votes nationally but this time
that gave it an overall majority in
parliament
its vote increased by three percent of
the electorate but its representation
increased by
17 of the total number of seats bringing
the party's share of seats back into
rough proportionality
and satisfying poppa's criterion with
flying colors
okay skipping more about voting systems
and just getting into some political
philosophy here
and david writes in science we do not
consider it surprising
that a community of scientists with
different initial hopes and expectations
continually in dispute about their rival
theories gradually come into near
unanimous agreement
over a steady stream of issues yet still
continue to disagree all the time
it is not surprising because in their
case there are observable facts that
they can use to test their theories
they converge with each other on any
given issue because they are all
converging
on the objective truth in politics it is
customary to be cynical about that sort
of convergence being possible but that
is a pessimistic view
throughout the west a great deal of
philosophical knowledge that is nowadays
taken for granted by almost everyone
say that slavery is an abomination or
that women should be free to go out to
work or that autopsies should be legal
or that promotion in the armed forces
should not depend on skin color
was highly controversial only a matter
of decades ago and originally
the opposite positions were taken for
granted a successful truth-seeking
system works its way towards broad
consensus or near unanimity
the one state of public opinion that is
not subject to decision theoretic
paradoxes
and where the will of the people make
sense so convergence in the broad
consensus over time is made possible by
the fact that all concerned
are gradually eliminating errors in
their positions and converging on
objective truths
facilitating that process by meeting
poppa's criterion as well as possible
is more important than which of two
contending factors with near equal
support gets its way at a particular
election
pours down my reflection this is one of
the most contentious parts of what might
be called realist philosophy in the
broadest
sense many people are realists when it
comes to science but not necessarily
realists when it comes to morality
that there is a best thing to want there
is an objective good out there
religious people are often moral
realists in that sense they believe
there's an objective
difference between good and bad and
there is an objective good
that we should strive for but we can get
to politics even some people who would
endorse that notion
don't necessarily think that in politics
that there's an objective good that we
could be searching for
but this is an argument that in fact
there is because people tend to converge
on certain political opinions that
hitherto
might have been regarded as completely
irreconcilable
we're going to see in the next chapter
which is on beauty and aesthetics
that there's an objectivity to
aesthetics as well
and so a realist is someone who thinks
there's an objectivity to just about
everything
okay so i'm skipping a little bit and
getting just to the last
paragraph and david writes apportionment
systems electoral systems and other
institutions of human cooperation were
for the most part designed or evolved
to cope with day-to-day controversy to
cobble together ways of proceeding
without violence
despite intense disagreement about what
would be best
and the best of them succeeded as well
as they do because they have often
unintentionally
implemented solutions with enormous
reach consequently
coping with controversy in the present
has become merely a means to an end
the purpose of deferring to the majority
in democratic systems
should be to approach unanimity in the
future by giving all concerned
the incentive to abandon bad ideas and
to conjecture better ones
creatively changing the options is what
allows people in real life to cooperate
in ways that no go theorems seem to say
are impossible
and it is what allows individual minds
to choose it all
the growth of the body of knowledge
about which there is unanimous agreement
does not entail a dying down of
controversy
on the contrary human beings will never
disagree any less than they do now
and that is a very good thing if those
institutions do
if those institutions do as they seem to
fulfill the hope that it is possible for
changes to be for the better
on balance then human life can improve
without limit
as we advance from misconception to ever
better misconception
and that's the end of the chapter a
great way to end as well
and david's talked about this before
rather than saying moving from
um from explanation to ever better
explanation or from
theory to ever better theory or from
policy to a bit of better policy he said
there what he said in other places
it will be better if we all just
recognize that everything that we
think is our best idea right now is
nonetheless a misconception
and so we're moving from misconception
to better misconception all the time
and this idea too that even though
disagreements can be intense at any
given parochial moment in time
we can expect that even if a democratic
vote
is very very close and we might think
that 49
of people or you know 49.9 percent of
people or whatever number you'd like to
have
less than 50 of people are the losers
and therefore failed to convince the
rest of society
of their ideas and failed to be
convinced themselves and so it seems
like we have this irreconcilable
difference
nonetheless over time people can
use their creative minds to in their own
mind by their own lights
come to be persuaded and therefore
we come to a certain amount of unanimity
in society
we come to all agree that certain things
are good things
slavery is bad raising our children in a
certain way is good
respecting reason and logic is better
than uh deferring to superstition and so
on and so forth
that in time people can be persuaded of
the objective good
so at this time right now in 2020
there are a number of elections coming
up in my country and around the world
i hope that people read this chapter uh
no matter what side of the political
debate they're on
to come to understand which systems are
more or less democratic what ways in
which we might
improve decision making ourselves
personally
or as a society and one simple rule of
thumb is
is this change that you're suggesting
going to make it easier
to remove a bad ruler or not and if
we've got
committees of non-elected officials
making decisions
and those officials can't be easily
removed by
the voters then that's an undemocratic
system
and in your own life if you're
confronted with some kind of challenge
and you've got a number of choices
before you don't think that you
simply have to choose that there's this
false dichotomy there are only these two
things there's two ways forward that you
can see
it's a feature of poppa's philosophy
david deutscher's philosophy that
there's always a third way
you can creative come up creatively come
up with the third way in fact
that really is your purpose as a human
being to creatively come up with better
options in your own life
and perhaps better options for other
people as well all right
so let's end it there and next time
we're on to
perhaps the most controversial of all
the
chapters that exist in the book many of
them are controversial of course not
controversial in a bad way
controversial in the way of making you
think that what you have
up until now thought was the right thing
to think
in fact is flawed in some way and this
idea that
there is an objectivity to aesthetics is
certainly something that today
needs to be defended and david has a
really interesting way of talking about
is there an objectivity to beauty is
there a way of
actually trying to come up with a
criterion for beauty attractiveness
aesthetics okay until then bye-bye
[Music]
as always thank you to everyone on
patreon who's been supporting me
i've got a couple more patreons right
now um and
anyone who'd like to give a paypal
donation please know that it's accepted
with
great gratitude especially right now
okay thanks everyone bye-bye
[Music]
you